[00:00:00] what can we learn from nature to tackle the poli crisis before we start? Who have you consumed social media or news in the past 24 hours? I'm going to come back to you. Just to see that the reactions, all right? Yeah. All right. Yeah. Okay. So everybody as expected,

[00:00:24] I'm not about, I'm not sure about you, but when I look at my feet, it often looks like this biodiversity crisis. We have a war crisis. We have a pollution crisis. We have a poverty crisis. We have an AI crisis. We have a mental health crisis. We have a climate crisis. Holy shit for such a smart species that we always claim us to be.

[00:00:44] We are doing a lot of Fucked up shit to us and to this planet to our own well being and so forth. Now that let even some of us to describe our own species as [00:01:00] cancer, which is quite drastic to describe yourself as a cancer. That's unfortunately. take so many lives, but what if there was an alternative right now we see cancer or something that is destroying life and we see ourselves sometimes as this kind of destroying life force.

[00:01:18] But what if there would be an alternative? The alternative today, I want to talk with you about a keystone species. What if we, instead of destroying life, we could bring life in nature. Keystone species are species that are all species are important, but they are even more important because they shape the ecosystem.

[00:01:38] They help other species to thrive. And so what I want to talk to you today about this, if we can, maybe as a species, we can move from being something like cancer. To something more like a keystone species, where we bring more life than what we destroy. So how could that actually look like? First, we would start to clean up our home right now.

[00:01:58] We're doing it quite a messy [00:02:00] job. So if we compare that with our house, with our flats, we, what we're doing to our planet, we wouldn't live like that in our own four walls. Second is we would make peace with us and with other species right now. That is definitely not the case. We would get to know our flatmates.

[00:02:16] So Oliver was just talking about this right now. We often we don't even know how many flatmates we have. Ergo how many species we actually have. Nobody knows. Nobody exactly knows how many species we have. That's still that's often like still crazy to me. So we are living on the planet without species yet.

[00:02:31] We don't even know how many other species there are. Not even talking about their behavior, not even talking about the different skills, their DNA, what they're actually doing on this planet, not even talking about this, but just the sheer number of who are we sharing this home planet with. We don't even know.

[00:02:47] The fourth would be going back to that baseline that Oliver was talking about. So if we would become a Keystone species, actually, we would slowly but surely go exactly where Oliver said, [00:03:00] moving back to that baseline, going backwards. And fifth, we would Hopefully, when we clean up our home, when we got our stuff together here on our planet, maybe in the future, we can even bring life to the galaxy.

[00:03:12] We could go to Mars, which is right now, at least as much as we know it, don't really have life on it. We could actually bring life to other planets. So we could definitely become a keystone species that shapes and brings life. All right. Cool,cool. Ollie, how did we get there? So that's again something where I would encourage everybody to look into nature.

[00:03:35] So if we look at just on the time scale that we here on this planet is that our species is around for around like 300, 000 years. So that's like very short. it's very long if we compare it to like now it's 2024. it has been some mile, but if we compare that to live on our planet, that's 4 billion years ago where that started.

[00:03:55] So nature is pretty much the best performing research and development [00:04:00] department in this world. And I think, we should, yeah, have a bit more humility and look a bit more into nature for some guidance. So again, I invite everybody to come with me and see a bit like what nature is doing and maybe discover things that we can learn from this.

[00:04:19] I think a lot of things that animals are doing, we can also see in our society when we see animals, there's usually three reactions that they have when it comes to danger, which are in our case, the different crisis. So when an animal faces danger, like a lion, a leopard and so forth, there's usually like three reactions.

[00:04:41] So basically you just run away, freeze, so they just they wait and they don't move at all. And so they hope that the predator won't see them and so forth. And we have fight. So where you just you start charging because that's the only way outwards. And I believe we see the same thing [00:05:00] happen in our society when we are faced with danger, like the climate crisis, biodiversity crisis, war, pollution, and so forth.

[00:05:06] We have people that. So they just pretend it's not their problem. They just run away from it and just do business as usual, do the daily lives, but running away from it as far as they can. And we have people that freeze that somehow realize there's something off in this world. But shoot, there's so many things that are messed up and so many different solutions.

[00:05:27] I don't know what to do. I don't know who to trust. Ah, I'm just overwhelmed. I'm not going to do anything. So these are people that freeze and then we have the people that fight. So the fighters are those people that see okay, there is a danger, but they don't We need to start doing something about this and not like physically fighting, but fighting in terms of changing the status quo and how the system currently is running.

[00:05:49] So these are people like that run NGOs, that do biodiversity businesses, that are activists in all kinds of shapes or forms that can be parents that try to [00:06:00] raise the next generation in a better way. It can have all kinds of shapes. But it's those people that actually take action that don't just talk and say Oh, this is messed up.

[00:06:09] And this is messed up. And, oh, we're all going to die, but people that actually take action. So these are the fighters. Now, again, question comes a bit to you. I would love to know where you sit right now. Are you somebody that rather fleece? Are you somebody that rather freeze right now when it comes to all these crisis?

[00:06:28] Or do you think you're a fighter? And again, that is all coming not from a place of judgment at all. it's just important to know a bit like where you sit so that you can then maybe make next steps. So I quickly come back. I would just like to see quickly in the comment section, what you would identify yourself with.

[00:06:45] I'm just to see, I have a certain, I think there's a certain kind of type of person here, but I don't want to be biased. So just check. So fight honey badger. Yeah. All right. So I have a couple of [00:07:00] fighters and then what do we do from that? All right. Olli understood. Let's look into nature. We have some people that flee, freeze and fight, but what can we really do with this?

[00:07:12] Yeah. I think. We should to maximize our energy in order to really have the impact that we want to. We should prioritize. We should first try to help the fighters. Now we should focus on the freezers. And then we come to the flighters. I don't think we can tackle everybody at the same time. Personally, I'm always somebody.

[00:07:32] Okay, let's take a break. Tiny steps towards, the better direction and where do you start, if you can't like talk to everybody, which group do you think has like the biggest impact to start with? And I think that's the fighters, they already have a lot of things figured out.

[00:07:47] So they have often like already the knowledge they have solutions. They really understood the. Pain points of the different problems. And I'm not talking just here about the biodiversity crisis. That can be climate, that can be justice, that can be poverty, but these fighters, [00:08:00] they already understand the problem really well and they came up with a solution that could actually get out of this so often.

[00:08:06] You would be surprised how little support they actually get in the efforts. I don't know. I have, I've talked by now I'm doing this now for three, four years where I'm on this journey and I talk with countless people in NGOs and businesses and policies, and you would be surprised how little support they get in terms of finance, in terms of like voices, in terms of attention and so forth.

[00:08:27] So just by. Working together and helping to support each other so that they get the support that they needed would already help a lot. Second, unite. So what I often see there as well is that you have certain silos. You would be surprised how you would always think ah, we have this bigger audacious goal that we're working towards no matter if it's like nature or when it comes to regulating our climate.

[00:08:49] But if you look at really deep down on cop on LinkedIn, On, in person, the conversation you sometimes can still shine through that we're not collaborating enough, [00:09:00] even though that we are chasing the same. The same end goal and the third is also holding accountable. So I see plenty of people that start very positively and they come out and they say I have this like really great plan and I really want to change the world.

[00:09:14] But sooner or later, unfortunately, the toxic system that is currently running is slowly start grabbing them. So we always make sure that. When we start on a really right foot that we keep on challenge each other and that we also need each other accountable so that we, yeah, really keep on the journey that we set out that we wanted to do the third, the second one are the freezes.

[00:09:36] So now, okay, we. the fighters, which group should we then engage with? And I think this should be the freezers because they're much easier to convince and to make part of bring into our bubble and tackle the different crisis and the freezers. We do three things with them. The first is we provide knowledge because quite often people freeze because there is a gap between the [00:10:00] knowledge that they currently have.

[00:10:01] And the knowledge that they need in order to overcome this kind of freezing state, because if you gain more and more knowledge, then sooner or later, you will see the nuances between the different aspects of the crisis. The second one is giving agency, and that's very important for me. This is like what I do 24 try to do 24 7 with our company.

[00:10:20] yeah, it's to try to really give. People back the agency does so that they know they can actually do something and I can start with something really small as like changing your diet that can grow into something like, Hey, how can I bring nature topics more into the school of my child that can grow into like changing policies that can grow into Creating your own biodiversity business that can really grow, but it has to start with giving people back agency that they can actually do something about all of that stuff. And the third is making change convenient as a very painful lesson that I learned, especially the last two years, is that if we compare nature protection, restoration, [00:11:00] rewilding.

[00:11:01] And the crisis that I tackle the most, if I compare those activities with our activities that are currently very popular in our society, like online shopping or streaming and so forth, it's I see often that doing the really good thing for nature is much harder. Then kind of distractions that are not good for us.

[00:11:22] So really good concrete example. Amazon has this one click shopping button. So you basically you just look at something you like it. You basically click on that one magic button and a product appears in 24 hours and we need to find ways how we can make protection restoration rewilding all of this positive nature work as easy as possible for the freezers to get them on board.

[00:11:44] Now, what do we do about So I'm not going to lie, I think of all the three, these are definitely the toughest not to crack. So I think there's three things how we can at least attempt to do that. The first one is awareness. I [00:12:00] believe there are definitely some flighters that are still not really aware of this.

[00:12:03] At least I always hope so because otherwise I have to commit to the idea that they're just like evil and I don't necessarily want to do that. Yeah. Also urgency. Sometimes those people that flight, they don't understand how urgent the situation is right now. And that we can't wait another 30, 40 years of business as usual.

[00:12:24] The second one is to try to show them selfish benefits. So how can they benefit? How can we show them that these are actually opportunities? They're not just Oh, this is forbidden. This is forbidden. This But how can we show them there's benefits on the health? on the financial perspective, on the food perspective and so forth.

[00:12:44] So how can we make it as enticing as possible for them? And the third one is pressure. So we do it the nice way. We try the carrot, but sooner or later, we also need to come with the sticky bits. If that is the only way how to do things through [00:13:00] legislation, policies, and so on, we need to give those things really to teeth so that they actually start to work because right now they're definitely not and they fail us.

[00:13:10] So how do we go from this? We basically start to pollinate from first fighters, dental freezers, and then to flyers. So we are creating some sort of keystone individuals that then bring change to, the Individuals that bring change to the families that bring change to the communities to the companies that working in two governments and so forth.

[00:13:32] really, in a nutshell, what was I talking about? No matter what crisis you find most important to tackle. I think nature has a great blueprint for that. We are, we can be a keystone species. We don't have to be cancer. People are in different kinds of situations. Some are do flight, some freezing, some are fighting, and then we have to try to increase the number of keystone people that will drive the change.

[00:13:57] Now if we do all of this, we will definitely [00:14:00] see our social media, our newsfeed, and most importantly, the real world start to look like this. Rewilding company raises biggest VC round ever. We stayed within 1. 5 degrees. 10 years in a row without war and all SDGs met in two years in advance. Now, personally, I refuse to believe that this is an unrealistic dream.

[00:14:26] Ready to get your hands dirty.

[00:14:33] Thank you, Oliver. Yeah, the reactions say it all. Amazing presentation. We have one question from Nico. Did I just hear an Elon Musk reference? Did I just hear an Elon Musk reference? I meant the Mars part. Ah, yeah. Yeah. for me, it's always a bit like, very bizarre to [00:15:00] understand, like, why we want to understand, like, why we want to expand to other planets.

[00:15:04] I just don't understand why we at least not start to clean up our home because there's so much financials going towards. Expansion rather than first, like figuring out how we can do a better job at home, because right now, at least we have the 100 percent certainty that this is a really great place to be.

[00:15:20] It's really great planet. So how can we first do our job at home, protecting restoration? Ensuring at least a decent life for everybody and then we can still expand to like all different planets like, go for it. But there's so many problems to tackle here. why go to more set?

[00:15:40] All right. Any other questions?

[00:15:48] Just be great to get your I know a lot of this is about giving people hope. Yeah, and to get change. People have to be hopeful and to know that there's a path [00:16:00] and there's a. Yeah. Yeah, a bright future. And I just I'd love to get here. what are your, what's your approach to that?

[00:16:08] And obviously you've got the community and sharing the stories. So we're aligned, aren't we? We're sharing the good stuff that's happening, but if I send any other advice or like tips you'd share around that. Yeah. Yeah. personally, I still try to find the sweet spot because I'm somebody like, I love really positive messaging because people need to see, because especially like the messaging that you, for example, chose for your presentation, a lot of people, you would be surprised how little people know Chris Tompkins.

[00:16:34] If you compare like the media coverage of Elon Musk and Chris Tompkins, it's just it's just, you can't even on the chart. It wouldn't even work. So I think positive stories are very important. And at the same time, I still try to find always the balance as well to bring in urgency so that it also stings a little bit just because right now, for example, really great.

[00:16:55] Example was nature documentaries, you watch the nature documentaries and [00:17:00] whales and you see the wildebeest herds in Africa and so on. And you get this really, the idea of it is beautiful to show people like how amazing our planet is, but easily they get the misunderstanding of this is like really how big chunks of our world is looking like when in reality.

[00:17:15] We have much more cows, we have much more dogs, we have much more, chickens, and that would be a realistic nature documentary. And so I often like still try to bring in a bit of sting as well, so that they understand that. We benefit in so many ways from nature. So let's get our stuff together ASAP because right now we're losing it.

[00:17:34] One thing that I can just say in terms of communication is on social media. It's always a bit hard, especially if you reached a certain amount where you now try to touch more people and you're not even niche down. But what I usually try at least and. In conferences or when one to one conversations, I try to understand who is in front of me and what, how are they motivated?

[00:17:55] Are they motivated by finance? I'm not going to go the moral route. If they are interested [00:18:00] in interested in family, I go the family route. If it's, for example, health, 75 percent of cancer medication is coming from nature. Unfortunately, there's a high likelihood people lost somebody to that. So sometimes I use that route.

[00:18:14] So I usually try to think about okay, who's in front of me and how can I not go Hey, nature's awesome spiritual. And I'm, I love every single animal and you should too, but I'd really try to see okay, who's in front of me and then cater to their motivations a bit. It's a bit like, it's a bit, yeah, it's some people maybe don't like this approach, but for me.

[00:18:36] If you learn more about neuroscience and psychology, that's the route that makes more sense to change behaviors. Awesome. Thanks,

[00:18:47] Hannah.

[00:18:51] Yeah. thank you. awesome presentation. you're, yeah, both, both all of us have got incredible visualizations, by the way, like really great slides. [00:19:00] yeah, I think Oliver, it's something that you posted today. What's up? Was it today? Yeah, seven hours ago because I re shared it on LinkedIn and then I realized that actually it was you.

[00:19:10] I was like, Oh, yeah, this is so relevant to something else. So earlier today, I'm going to pop a link in the chat. And then I was like, it literally was what you said. it's your like Spotify unwrapped thing, but like nature unwrapped. I don't know if other people on the call have seen this. But, would definitely recommend get great.

[00:19:25] Yeah, definitely recommend going on all of us, LinkedIn profile and seeing that if not, cause I thought that was so cool. Like the fact that you're taking like a very like established and mainstream thing, especially, people love sharing about their tastes in music, like that's. Such like I don't know why but people just go absolutely crazy for the spotify unwrapped thing and then reframing that as this is how much I benefited nature personally like these are how many sort of like species that like my action has positively impact or different Environments that have grown as a result of my like advocacy [00:20:00] or activism or whatever And I just thought that So cool.

[00:20:03] and I dunno, it just reminded me as well of if we reframed the whole conversation about taxes and people were boasting about how much, their tax contributions is helping their country rather than it being seen as this, Oh, the rich won't want to get taxed. They're going to offshore all their assets.

[00:20:19] They're going to do as much as they can to avoid paying the taxes that they should pay. if they were able to reframe that. and see it as a contribution to society in the same way that this sort of like nature unwrapped thing could be seen as individuals, like contributions to nature.

[00:20:33] I think that would just be so cool, but yeah, I just wanted to highlight it cause I really enjoyed it. Yeah. No. And the beauty of this is like what I wanted to show with this, it's actually not really unrealistic and it's actually not really hard to do. So Oliver was just sharing his, all the data that he's collecting with Earthly.

[00:20:50] And so it's just sometimes about user experience design, but He can basically do something very similar to his companies already. So sometimes it's just about like how we [00:21:00] are. Yeah, sometimes it's just about like how we are phrasing things and how we are building things and what we give like priorities and, another thing like to come back to Oliver's question, I think one of the really thing where I feel often when we are facing this kind of crisis is it's a very daunting topic.

[00:21:16] You need to try to understand a bit like what motivates people and what is a, what are people giving their attention to right now? And then trying to play a bit with that. So I look a lot in this kind of like pop culture and so on and try how we can find in there. Because if we look at cities and over days where people, most of us live, it's there is no nature.

[00:21:35] There's it's very limited and we spend 90 percent of our time indoors. So how can you create these touch points? How can we make it relevant to a person that is in front of you? Sam.

